CHAPTER 21
LEARNING PROBABILISTIC MODELS
In which we view learning as a form of uncertain reasoning from observations, and devise
models to represent the uncertain world.
Chapter 12 pointed out the prevalence of uncertainty in real environments. Agents can handle
uncertainty by using the methods of probability and decision theory, but ﬁrst they must learn
their probabilistic theories of the world from experience. This chapter explains how they
can do that, by formulating the learning task itself as a process of probabilistic inference
(Section 21.1). We will see that a Bayesian view of learning is extremely powerful, providing
general solutions to the problems of noise, overﬁtting, and optimal prediction. It also takes
into account the fact that a less-than-omniscient agent can never be certain about which theory
of the world is correct, yet must still make decisions by using some theory of the world.
We describe methods for learning probability models—primarily Bayesian networks—in
Sections 21.2 and 21.3. Some of the material in this chapter is fairly mathematical, although
the general lessons can be understood without plunging into the details. It may beneﬁt the
reader to review Chapters 12 and 13 and peek at Appendix A.
21.1 Statistical Learning
The key concepts in this chapter, just as in Chapter 19, are data andhypotheses . Here, the
data are evidence —that is, instantiations of some or all of the random variables describing the
domain. The hypotheses in this chapter are probabilistic theories of how the domain works,
including logical theories as a special case.
Consider a simple example. Our favorite surprise candy comes in two ﬂavors: cherry
(yum) and lime (ugh). The manufacturer has a peculiar sense of humor and wraps each piece
of candy in the same opaque wrapper, regardless of ﬂavor. The candy is sold in very large
bags, of which there are known to be ﬁve kinds—again, indistinguishable from the outside:
h1: 100% cherry,
h2: 75% cherry + 25% lime,
h3: 50% cherry + 50% lime,
h4: 25% cherry + 75% lime,
h5: 100% lime.
Given a new bag of candy, the random variable H(forhypothesis ) denotes the type of the
bag, with possible values h1through h5.His not directly observable, of course. As the
pieces of candy are opened and inspected, data are revealed— D1,D2,:::,DN, where each Di
is a random variable with possible values cherry andlime. The basic task faced by the agent

Section 21.1 Statistical Learning 773
is to predict the ﬂavor of the next piece of candy.1Despite its apparent triviality, this scenario
serves to introduce many of the major issues. The agent really does need to infer a theory of
its world, albeit a very simple one.
Bayesian learning simply calculates the probability of each hypothesis, given the data, Bayesian learning
and makes predictions on that basis. That is, the predictions are made by using allthe hy-
potheses, weighted by their probabilities, rather than by using just a single “best” hypothesis.
In this way, learning is reduced to probabilistic inference.
LetDrepresent all the data, with observed value d. The key quantities in the Bayesian ap-
proach are the hypothesis prior ,P(hi), and the likelihood of the data under each hypothesis, Hypothesis prior
Likelihood P(djhi). The probability of each hypothesis is obtained by Bayes’ rule:
P(hijd) =P(djhi)P(hi): (21.1)
Now, suppose we want to make a prediction about an unknown quantity X. Then we have
P(Xjd) =å
iP(Xjhi)P(hijd); (21.2)
where each hypothesis determines a probability distribution over X. This equation shows that
predictions are weighted averages over the predictions of the individual hypotheses, where the
weight P(hijd)is proportional to the prior probability of hiand its degree of ﬁt, according
to Equation (21.1). The hypotheses themselves are essentially “intermediaries” between the
raw data and the predictions.
For our candy example, we will assume for the time being that the prior distribution
over h1;:::; h5is given byh0:1;0:2;0:4;0:2;0:1i, as advertised by the manufacturer. The
likelihood of the data is calculated under the assumption that the observations are i.i.d. (see
page 683), so that
P(djhi) =Õ
jP(djjhi): (21.3)
For example, suppose the bag is really an all-lime bag ( h5) and the ﬁrst 10 candies are all
lime; then P(djh3)is 0:510, because half the candies in an h3bag are lime.2Figure 21.1(a)
shows how the posterior probabilities of the ﬁve hypotheses change as the sequence of 10
lime candies is observed. Notice that the probabilities start out at their prior values, so h3
is initially the most likely choice and remains so after 1 lime candy is unwrapped. After 2
lime candies are unwrapped, h4is most likely; after 3 or more, h5(the dreaded all-lime bag)
is the most likely. After 10 in a row, we are fairly certain of our fate. Figure 21.1(b) shows
the predicted probability that the next candy is lime, based on Equation (21.2). As we would
expect, it increases monotonically toward 1.
The example shows that the Bayesian prediction eventually agrees with the true hypoth- J
esis. This is characteristic of Bayesian learning. For any ﬁxed prior that does not rule out the
true hypothesis, the posterior probability of any false hypothesis will, under certain techni-
cal conditions, eventually vanish. This happens simply because the probability of generating
“uncharacteristic” data indeﬁnitely is vanishingly small. (This point is analogous to one made
in the discussion of PAC learning in Chapter 19.) More important, the Bayesian prediction is
1Statistically sophisticated readers will recognize this scenario as a variant of the urn-and-ball setup. We ﬁnd
urns and balls less compelling than candy.
2We stated earlier that the bags of candy are very large; otherwise, the i.i.d. assumption fails to hold. Technically,
it is more correct (but less hygienic) to rewrap each candy after inspection and return it to the bag.

774 Chapter 21 Learning Probabilistic Models
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0  2  4  6  8  10Posterior probability of hypothesis
Number of observations in dP(h1 | d)
P(h2 | d)
P(h3 | d)
P(h4 | d)
P(h5 | d)
 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
 0  2  4  6  8  10Probability that next candy is lime
Number of observations in d
(a) (b)
Figure 21.1 (a) Posterior probabilities P(hijd1;:::; dN)from Equation (21.1). The number
of observations Nranges from 1 to 10, and each observation is of a lime candy. (b) Bayesian
prediction P(DN+1=limejd1;:::; dN)from Equation (21.2).
optimal , whether the data set is small or large. Given the hypothesis prior, any other predic-
tion is expected to be correct less often.
The optimality of Bayesian learning comes at a price, of course. For real learning prob-
lems, the hypothesis space is usually very large or inﬁnite, as we saw in Chapter 19. In some
cases, the summation in Equation (21.2) (or integration, in the continuous case) can be carried
out tractably, but in most cases we must resort to approximate or simpliﬁed methods.
A very common approximation—one that is usually adopted in science—is to make pre-
dictions based on a single most probable hypothesis—that is, an hithat maximizes P(hijd).
This is often called a maximum a posteriori or MAP (pronounced “em-ay-pee”) hypothesis.Maximum a
posteriori
Predictions made according to an MAP hypothesis hMAP are approximately Bayesian to the
extent that P(Xjd)P(XjhMAP). In our candy example, hMAP=h5after three lime can-
dies in a row, so the MAP learner then predicts that the fourth candy is lime with probability
1.0—a much more dangerous prediction than the Bayesian prediction of 0.8 shown in Fig-
ure 21.1(b). As more data arrive, the MAP and Bayesian predictions become closer, because
the competitors to the MAP hypothesis become less and less probable.
Although this example doesn’t show it, ﬁnding MAP hypotheses is often much easier
than Bayesian learning, because it requires solving an optimization problem instead of a
large summation (or integration) problem.
In both Bayesian learning and MAP learning, the hypothesis prior P(hi)plays an im-
portant role. We saw in Chapter 19 that overﬁtting can occur when the hypothesis space is
too expressive, that is, when it contains many hypotheses that ﬁt the data set well. Bayesian
and MAP learning methods use the prior to penalize complexity . Typically, more complex
hypotheses have a lower prior probability—in part because there so many of them. On the
other hand, more complex hypotheses have a greater capacity to ﬁt the data. (In the extreme
case, a lookup table can reproduce the data exactly.) Hence, the hypothesis prior embodies a
tradeoff between the complexity of a hypothesis and its degree of ﬁt to the data.

