Section 21.3 Learning with Hidden Variables: The EM Algorithm 795
P(R1|R0)R0 P(R1|R0)P(R1|R0)P(R1|R0) P(R1|R0)R0 P(R2|R1)R1 P(R3|R2)R2 P(R4|R3)R3
R1P(U1|R1) R1P(U1|R1)R2P(U2|R2)R3P(U3|R3)R4P(U4|R4)Rain4 Rain0Rain1 Rain0Rain1Rain2Rain3
Umbrella1 Umbrella1Umbrella2Umbrella3Umbrella4
Figure 21.15 An unrolled dynamic Bayesian network that represents a hidden Markov
model (repeat of Figure 14.16).
21.3.3 Learning hidden Markov models
Our ﬁnal application of EM involves learning the transition probabilities in hidden Markov
models (HMMs). Recall from Section 14.3 that a hidden Markov model can be represented
by a dynamic Bayes net with a single discrete state variable, as illustrated in Figure 21.15.
Each data point consists of an observation sequence of ﬁnite length, so the problem is to
learn the transition probabilities from a set of observation sequences (or from just one long
sequence).
We have already seen how to learn Bayes nets, but there is a complication: in Bayes
nets, each parameter is distinct; in a hidden Markov model, on the other hand, the individual
transition probabilities from state ito state jat time t,i jt=P(Xt+1=jjXt=i), are repeated
across time—that is, i jt=i jfor all t. To estimate the transition probability from state ito
state j, we simply calculate the expected proportion of times that the system undergoes a
transition to state jwhen in state i:
i j å
tˆN(Xt+1=j;Xt=i)=å
tˆN(Xt=i):
The expected counts are computed by an HMM inference algorithm. The forward–backward
algorithm shown in Figure 14.4 can be modiﬁed very easily to compute the necessary prob-
abilities. One important point is that the probabilities required are obtained by smoothing
rather than ﬁltering . Filtering gives the probability distribution of the current state given the
past, but smoothing gives the distribution given all evidence, including what happens after
a particular transition occurred. The evidence in a murder case is usually obtained after the
crime (i.e., the transition from state ito state j) has taken place.
21.3.4 The general form of the EM algorithm
We have seen several instances of the EM algorithm. Each involves computing expected
values of hidden variables for each example and then recomputing the parameters, using the
expected values as if they were observed values. Let xbe all the observed values in all the
examples, let Zdenote all the hidden variables for all the examples, and let be all the
parameters for the probability model. Then the EM algorithm is
(i+1)=argmax
å
zP(Z=zjx;(i))L(x;Z=zj):

796 Chapter 21 Learning Probabilistic Models
This equation is the EM algorithm in a nutshell. The E-step is the computation of the summa-
tion, which is the expectation of the log likelihood of the “completed” data with respect to the
distribution P(Z=zjx;(i)), which is the posterior over the hidden variables, given the data.
The M-step is the maximization of this expected log likelihood with respect to the parame-
ters. For mixtures of Gaussians, the hidden variables are the Zi js, where Zi jis 1 if example j
was generated by component i. For Bayes nets, Zi jis the value of unobserved variable Xiin
example j. For HMMs, Zjtis the state of the sequence in example jat time t. Starting from
the general form, it is possible to derive an EM algorithm for a speciﬁc application once the
appropriate hidden variables have been identiﬁed.
As soon as we understand the general idea of EM, it becomes easy to derive all sorts
of variants and improvements. For example, in many cases the E-step—the computation of
posteriors over the hidden variables—is intractable, as in large Bayes nets. It turns out that
one can use an approximate E-step and still obtain an effective learning algorithm. With a
sampling algorithm such as MCMC (see Section 13.4), the learning process is very intuitive:
each state (conﬁguration of hidden and observed variables) visited by MCMC is treated ex-
actly as if it were a complete observation. Thus, the parameters can be updated directly after
each MCMC transition. Other forms of approximate inference, such as variational methods
and loopy belief propagation, have also proved effective for learning very large networks.
21.3.5 Learning Bayes net structures with hidden variables
In Section 21.2.7, we discussed the problem of learning Bayes net structures with complete
data. When unobserved variables inﬂuence observed data, things get more difﬁcult. In the
simplest case, a human expert might tell the learning algorithm that certain hidden variables
exist, leaving it to the algorithm to ﬁnd a place for them in the network structure. For example,
an algorithm might try to learn the structure shown in Figure 21.11(a) on page 789, given the
information that HeartDisease (a three-valued variable) should be included in the model. As
in the complete-data case, the overall algorithm has an outer loop that searches over structures
and an inner loop that ﬁts the network parameters given the structure.
If the learning algorithm is not told which hidden variables exist, then there are two
choices: either pretend that the data are really complete—which may force the algorithm to
learn a parameter-intensive model such as the one in Figure 21.11(b)—or invent new hidden
variables in order to simplify the model. The latter approach can be implemented by including
new modiﬁcation choices in the structure search: in addition to modifying links, the algorithm
can add or delete a hidden variable or change its arity. Of course, the algorithm will not know
that the new variable it has invented is called HeartDisease ; nor will it have meaningful
names for the values. Fortunately, newly invented hidden variables will usually be connected
to preexisting variables, so a human expert can often inspect the local conditional distributions
involving the new variable and ascertain its meaning.
As in the complete-data case, pure maximum-likelihood structure learning will result in
a completely connected network (moreover, one with no hidden variables), so some form of
complexity penalty is required. We can also apply MCMC to sample many possible network
structures, thereby approximating Bayesian learning. For example, we can learn mixtures of
Gaussians with an unknown number of components by sampling over the number; the approx-
imate posterior distribution for the number of Gaussians is given by the sampling frequencies
of the MCMC process.

Summary 797
For the complete-data case, the inner loop to learn the parameters is very fast—just a
matter of extracting conditional frequencies from the data set. When there are hidden vari-
ables, the inner loop may involve many iterations of EM or a gradient-based algorithm, and
each iteration involves the calculation of posteriors in a Bayes net, which is itself an NP-hard
problem. To date, this approach has proved impractical for learning complex models.
One possible improvement is the so-called structural EM algorithm, which operates in Structural EM
much the same way as ordinary (parametric) EM except that the algorithm can update the
structure as well as the parameters. Just as ordinary EM uses the current parameters to com-
pute the expected counts in the E-step and then applies those counts in the M-step to choose
new parameters, structural EM uses the current structure to compute expected counts and
then applies those counts in the M-step to evaluate the likelihood for potential new struc-
tures. (This contrasts with the outer-loop/inner-loop method, which computes new expected
counts for each potential structure.) In this way, structural EM may make several structural
alterations to the network without once recomputing the expected counts, and is capable of
learning nontrivial Bayes net structures. Structural EM has a search space over the space
of structures rather than the space of structures and parameters. Nonetheless, much work
remains to be done before we can say that the structure-learning problem is solved.
Summary
Statistical learning methods range from simple calculation of averages to the construction of
complex models such as Bayesian networks. They have applications throughout computer
science, engineering, computational biology, neuroscience, psychology, and physics. This
chapter has presented some of the basic ideas and given a ﬂavor of the mathematical under-
pinnings. The main points are as follows:
•Bayesian learning methods formulate learning as a form of probabilistic inference,
using the observations to update a prior distribution over hypotheses. This approach
provides a good way to implement Ockham’s razor, but quickly becomes intractable for
complex hypothesis spaces.
•Maximum a posteriori (MAP) learning selects a single most likely hypothesis given
the data. The hypothesis prior is still used and the method is often more tractable than
full Bayesian learning.
•Maximum-likelihood learning simply selects the hypothesis that maximizes the likeli-
hood of the data; it is equivalent to MAP learning with a uniform prior. In simple cases
such as linear regression and fully observable Bayesian networks, maximum-likelihood
solutions can be found easily in closed form. Naive Bayes learning is a particularly
effective technique that scales well.
• When some variables are hidden, local maximum likelihood solutions can be found
using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. Applications include unsuper-
vised clustering using mixtures of Gaussians, learning Bayesian networks, and learning
hidden Markov models.
• Learning the structure of Bayesian networks is an example of model selection . This
usually involves a discrete search in the space of structures. Some method is required
for trading off model complexity against degree of ﬁt.

