Summary 797
For the complete-data case, the inner loop to learn the parameters is very fast—just a
matter of extracting conditional frequencies from the data set. When there are hidden vari-
ables, the inner loop may involve many iterations of EM or a gradient-based algorithm, and
each iteration involves the calculation of posteriors in a Bayes net, which is itself an NP-hard
problem. To date, this approach has proved impractical for learning complex models.
One possible improvement is the so-called structural EM algorithm, which operates in Structural EM
much the same way as ordinary (parametric) EM except that the algorithm can update the
structure as well as the parameters. Just as ordinary EM uses the current parameters to com-
pute the expected counts in the E-step and then applies those counts in the M-step to choose
new parameters, structural EM uses the current structure to compute expected counts and
then applies those counts in the M-step to evaluate the likelihood for potential new struc-
tures. (This contrasts with the outer-loop/inner-loop method, which computes new expected
counts for each potential structure.) In this way, structural EM may make several structural
alterations to the network without once recomputing the expected counts, and is capable of
learning nontrivial Bayes net structures. Structural EM has a search space over the space
of structures rather than the space of structures and parameters. Nonetheless, much work
remains to be done before we can say that the structure-learning problem is solved.
Summary
Statistical learning methods range from simple calculation of averages to the construction of
complex models such as Bayesian networks. They have applications throughout computer
science, engineering, computational biology, neuroscience, psychology, and physics. This
chapter has presented some of the basic ideas and given a ﬂavor of the mathematical under-
pinnings. The main points are as follows:
•Bayesian learning methods formulate learning as a form of probabilistic inference,
using the observations to update a prior distribution over hypotheses. This approach
provides a good way to implement Ockham’s razor, but quickly becomes intractable for
complex hypothesis spaces.
•Maximum a posteriori (MAP) learning selects a single most likely hypothesis given
the data. The hypothesis prior is still used and the method is often more tractable than
full Bayesian learning.
•Maximum-likelihood learning simply selects the hypothesis that maximizes the likeli-
hood of the data; it is equivalent to MAP learning with a uniform prior. In simple cases
such as linear regression and fully observable Bayesian networks, maximum-likelihood
solutions can be found easily in closed form. Naive Bayes learning is a particularly
effective technique that scales well.
• When some variables are hidden, local maximum likelihood solutions can be found
using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. Applications include unsuper-
vised clustering using mixtures of Gaussians, learning Bayesian networks, and learning
hidden Markov models.
• Learning the structure of Bayesian networks is an example of model selection . This
usually involves a discrete search in the space of structures. Some method is required
for trading off model complexity against degree of ﬁt.

798 Chapter 21 Learning Probabilistic Models
•Nonparametric models represent a distribution using the collection of data points.
Thus, the number of parameters grows with the training set. Nearest-neighbors methods
look at the examples nearest to the point in question, whereas kernel methods form a
distance-weighted combination of all the examples.
Statistical learning continues to be a very active area of research. Enormous strides have been
made in both theory and practice, to the point where it is possible to learn almost any model
for which exact or approximate inference is feasible.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
The application of statistical learning techniques in AI was an active area of research in the
early years (see Duda and Hart, 1973) but became separated from mainstream AI as the
latter ﬁeld concentrated on symbolic methods. A resurgence of interest occurred shortly after
the introduction of Bayesian network models in the late 1980s; at roughly the same time,
a statistical view of neural network learning began to emerge. In the late 1990s, there was
a noticeable convergence of interests in machine learning, statistics, and neural networks,
centered on methods for creating large probabilistic models from data.
The naive Bayes model is one of the oldest and simplest forms of Bayesian network,
dating back to the 1950s. Its origins were mentioned in Chapter 12. Its surprising success is
partially explained by Domingos and Pazzani (1997). A boosted form of naive Bayes learning
won the ﬁrst KDD Cup data mining competition (Elkan, 1997). Heckerman (1998) gives an
excellent introduction to the general problem of Bayes net learning. Bayesian parameter
learning with Dirichlet priors for Bayesian networks was discussed by Spiegelhalter et al.
(1993). The beta distribution as a conjugate prior for a Bernoulli variable was ﬁrst derived
by Thomas (Bayes, 1763) and later reintroduced by Karl Pearson (1895) as a model for
skewed data; for many years it was known as a “Pearson Type I distribution.” Bayesian linear
regression is discussed in the text by Box and Tiao (1973); Minka (2010) provides a concise
summary of the derivations for the general multivariate case.
Several software packages incorporate mechanisms for statistical learning with Bayes
net models. These include B UGS (Bayesian inference Using Gibbs Sampling) (Gilks et al. ,
1994; Lunn et al. , 2000, 2013), J AGS (Just Another Gibbs Sampler) (Plummer, 2003), and
STAN (Carpenter et al. , 2017).
The ﬁrst algorithms for learning Bayes net structures used conditional independence
tests (Pearl, 1988; Pearl and Verma, 1991). Spirtes et al. (1993) implemented a compre-
hensive approach in the T ETRAD package for Bayes net learning. Algorithmic improvements
since then led to a clear victory in the 2001 KDD Cup data mining competition for a Bayes
net learning method (Cheng et al. , 2002). (The speciﬁc task here was a bioinformatics prob-
lem with 139,351 features!) A structure-learning approach based on maximizing likelihood
was developed by Cooper and Herskovits (1992) and improved by Heckerman et al. (1994).
More recent algorithms have achieved quite respectable performance in the complete-
data case (Moore and Wong, 2003; Teyssier and Koller, 2005). One important component is
an efﬁcient data structure, the AD-tree, for caching counts over all possible combinations of
variables and values (Moore and Lee, 1997). Friedman and Goldszmidt (1996) pointed out
the inﬂuence of the representation of local conditional distributions on the learned structure.

Bibliographical and Historical Notes 799
The general problem of learning probability models with hidden variables and missing
data was addressed by Hartley (1958), who described the general idea of what was later
called EM and gave several examples. Further impetus came from the Baum–Welch algo-
rithm for HMM learning (Baum and Petrie, 1966), which is a special case of EM. The paper
by Dempster, Laird, and Rubin (1977), which presented the EM algorithm in general form
and analyzed its convergence, is one of the most cited papers in both computer science and
statistics. (Dempster himself views EM as a schema rather than an algorithm, since a good
deal of mathematical work may be required before it can be applied to a new family of dis-
tributions.) McLachlan and Krishnan (1997) devote an entire book to the algorithm and its
properties. The speciﬁc problem of learning mixture models, including mixtures of Gaus-
sians, is covered by Titterington et al. (1985).
Within AI, A UTOCLASS (Cheeseman et al. , 1988; Cheeseman and Stutz, 1996) was the
ﬁrst successful system that used EM for mixture modeling. A UTOCLASS was applied to
a number of real-world scientiﬁc classiﬁcation tasks, including the discovery of new types
of stars from spectral data (Goebel et al. , 1989) and new classes of proteins and introns in
DNA/protein sequence databases (Hunter and States, 1992).
For maximum-likelihood parameter learning in Bayes nets with hidden variables, EM
and gradient-based methods were introduced around the same time by Lauritzen (1995) and
Russell et al. (1995). The structural EM algorithm was developed by Friedman (1998) and
applied to maximum-likelihood learning of Bayes net structures with latent variables. Fried-
man and Koller (2003) describe Bayesian structure learning. Daly et al. (2011) review the
ﬁeld of Bayes net learning, providing extensive citations to the literature.
The ability to learn the structure of Bayesian networks is closely connected to the issue
of recovering causal information from data. That is, is it possible to learn Bayes nets in
such a way that the recovered network structure indicates real causal inﬂuences? For many
years, statisticians avoided this question, believing that observational data (as opposed to data
generated from experimental trials) could yield only correlational information—after all, any
two variables that appear related might in fact be inﬂuenced by a third, unknown causal
factor rather than inﬂuencing each other directly. Pearl (2000) has presented convincing
arguments to the contrary, showing that there are in fact many cases where causality can be
ascertained and developing the causal network formalism to express causes and the effects
of intervention as well as ordinary conditional probabilities.
Nonparametric density estimation, also called Parzen window density estimation, was
investigated initially by Rosenblatt (1956) and Parzen (1962). Since that time, a huge litera-
ture has developed investigating the properties of various estimators. Devroye (1987) gives a
thorough introduction. There is also a rapidly growing literature on nonparametric Bayesian
methods, originating with the seminal work of Ferguson (1973) on the Dirichlet process ,Dirichlet process
which can be thought of as a distribution over Dirichlet distributions. These methods are par-
ticularly useful for mixtures with unknown numbers of components. Ghahramani (2005) and
Jordan (2005) provide useful tutorials on the many applications of these ideas to statistical
learning. The text by Rasmussen and Williams (2006) covers the Gaussian process , which Gaussian process
gives a way of deﬁning prior distributions over the space of continuous functions.
The material in this chapter brings together work from the ﬁelds of statistics and pattern
recognition, so the story has been told many times in many ways. Good texts on Bayesian
statistics include those by DeGroot (1970), Berger (1985), and Gelman et al. (1995). Bishop

800 Chapter 21 Learning Probabilistic Models
(2007), Hastie et al. (2009), Barber (2012), and Murphy (2012) provide excellent introduc-
tions to statistical machine learning. For pattern classiﬁcation, the classic text for many years
has been Duda and Hart (1973), now updated (Duda et al. , 2001). The annual NeurIPS
(Neural Information Processing Systems, formerly NIPS) conference, whose proceedings are
published as the series Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , includes many
Bayesian learning papers, as does the annual conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statis-
tics. Speciﬁcally Bayesian venues include the Valencia International Meetings on Bayesian
Statistics and the journal Bayesian Analysis .

