834 Chapter 22 Deep Learning
22.8.2 Natural language processing
Deep learning has also had a huge impact on natural language processing (NLP) applications
such as machine translation and speech recognition. Some advantages of deep learning for
these applications include the possibility of end-to-end learning, the automatic generation
of internal representations for the meanings of words, and the interchangeability of learned
encoders and decoders.
End-to-end learning refers to the construction of entire systems as a single, learned func-
tion f. For example, an ffor machine translation might take as input an English sentence
SEand produce an equivalent Japanese sentence SJ=f(SE). Such an fcan be learned from
training data in the form of human-translated pairs of sentences (or even pairs of texts, where
the alignment of corresponding sentences or phrases is part of the problem to be solved). A
more classical pipeline approach might ﬁrst parse SE, then extract its meaning, then re-express
the meaning in Japanese as SJ, then post-edit SJusing a language model for Japanese. This
pipeline approach has two major drawbacks: ﬁrst, errors are compounded at each stage; and
second, humans have to determine what constitutes a “parse tree” and a “meaning represen-
tation,” but there is no easily accessible ground truth for these notions, and our theoretical
ideas about them are almost certainly incomplete.
At our present stage of understanding, then, the classical pipeline approach—which, at
least naively, seems to correspond to how a human translator works—is outperformed by the
end-to-end method made possible by deep learning. For example, Wu et al. (2016b) showed
that end-to-end translation using deep learning reduced translation errors by 60% relative to
a previous pipeline-based system. As of 2020, machine translation systems are approaching
human performance for language pairs such as French and English for which very large paired
data sets are available, and they are usable for other language pairs covering the majority of
Earth’s population. There is even some evidence that networks trained on multiple languages
do in fact learn an internal meaning representation: for example, after learning to translate
Portuguese to English and English to Spanish, it is possible to translate Portuguese directly
into Spanish without any Portuguese/Spanish sentence pairs in the training set.
One of the most signiﬁcant ﬁndings to emerge from the application of deep learning
to language tasks is that a great deal deal of mileage comes from re-representing individ-
ual words as vectors in a high-dimensional space—so-called word embeddings (see Sec-
tion 25.1). The vectors are usually extracted from the weights of the ﬁrst hidden layer of
a network trained on large quantities of text, and they capture the statistics of the lexical
contexts in which words are used. Because words with similar meanings are used in similar
contexts, they end up close to each other in the vector space. This allows the network to gen-
eralize effectively across categories of words, without the need for humans to predeﬁne those
categories. For example, a sentence beginning “John bought a watermelon and two pounds
of . . . ” is likely to continue with “apples” or “bananas” but not with “thorium” or “geog-
raphy.” Such a prediction is much easier to make if “apples” and “bananas” have similar
representations in the internal layer.
22.8.3 Reinforcement learning
In reinforcement learning (RL), a decision-making agent learns from a sequence of reward
signals that provide some indication of the quality of its behavior. The goal is to optimize the
sum of future rewards. This can be done in several ways: in the terminology of Chapter 16,
Summary 835
the agent can learn a value function, a Q-function, a policy, and so on. From the point of
view of deep learning, all these are functions that can be represented by computation graphs.
For example, a value function in Go takes a board position as input and returns an estimate
of how advantageous the position is for the agent. While the methods of training in RL differ
from those of supervised learning, the ability of multilayer computation graphs to represent
complex functions over large input spaces has proved to be very useful. The resulting ﬁeld of
research is called deep reinforcement learning .Deep reinforcement
learning
In the 1950s, Arthur Samuel experimented with multilayer representations of value func-
tions in his work on reinforcement learning for checkers, but he found that in practice a linear
function approximator worked best. (This may have been a consequence of working with a
computer roughly 100 billion times less powerful than a modern tensor processing unit.) The
ﬁrst major successful demonstration of deep RL was DeepMind’s Atari-playing agent, DQN
(Mnih et al. , 2013). Different copies of this agent were trained to play each of several differ-
ent Atari video games, and demonstrated skills such as shooting alien spaceships, bouncing
balls with paddles, and driving simulated racing cars. In each case, the agent learned a Q-
function from raw image data with the reward signal being the game score. Subsequent work
has produced deep RL systems that play at a superhuman level on the majority of the 57
different Atari games. DeepMind’s A LPHA GOsystem also used deep RL to defeat the best
human players at the game of Go (see Chapter 6).
Despite its impressive successes, deep RL still faces signiﬁcant obstacles: it is often
difﬁcult to get good performance, and the trained system may behave very unpredictably
if the environment differs even a little from the training data (Irpan, 2018). Compared to
other applications of deep learning, deep RL is rarely applied in commercial settings. It is,
nonetheless, a very active area of research.
Summary
This chapter described methods for learning functions represented by deep computational
graphs. The main points were:
•Neural networks represent complex nonlinear functions with a network of parameter-
ized linear-threshold units.
• The back-propagation algorithm implements a gradient descent in parameter space to
minimize the loss function.
• Deep learning works well for visual object recognition, speech recognition, natural lan-
guage processing, and reinforcement learning in complex environments.
• Convolutional networks are particularly well suited for image processing and other tasks
where the data have a grid topology.
• Recurrent networks are effective for sequence-processing tasks including language mod-
eling and machine translation.
836 Chapter 22 Deep Learning
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
The literature on neural networks is vast. Cowan and Sharp (1988b, 1988a) survey the early
history, beginning with the work of McCulloch and Pitts (1943). (As mentioned in Chap-
ter 1, John McCarthy has pointed to the work of Nicolas Rashevsky (1936, 1938) as the
earliest mathematical model of neural learning.) Norbert Wiener, a pioneer of cybernetics
and control theory (Wiener, 1948), worked with McCulloch and Pitts and inﬂuenced a num-
ber of young researchers, including Marvin Minsky, who may have been the ﬁrst to develop
a working neural network in hardware, in 1951 (see Minsky and Papert, 1988, pp. ix–x).
Alan Turing (1948) wrote a research report titled Intelligent Machinery that begins with the
sentence “I propose to investigate the question as to whether it is possible for machinery to
show intelligent behaviour” and goes on to describe a recurrent neural network architecture
he called “B-type unorganized machines” and an approach to training them. Unfortunately,
the report went unpublished until 1969, and was all but ignored until recently.
The perceptron, a one-layer neural network with a hard-threshold activation function, was
popularized by Frank Rosenblatt (1957). After a demonstration in July 1958, the New York
Times described it as “the embryo of an electronic computer that [the Navy] expects will be
able to walk, talk, see, write, reproduce itself and be conscious of its existence.” Rosenblatt
(1960) later proved the perceptron convergence theorem, although it had been foreshadowed
by purely mathematical work outside the context of neural networks (Agmon, 1954; Motzkin
and Schoenberg, 1954). Some early work was also done on multilayer networks, including
Gamba perceptrons (Gamba et al. , 1961) and madalines (Widrow, 1962). Learning Ma-
chines (Nilsson, 1965) covers much of this early work and more. The subsequent demise
of early perceptron research efforts was hastened (or, the authors later claimed, merely ex-
plained) by the book Perceptrons (Minsky and Papert, 1969), which lamented the ﬁeld’s lack
of mathematical rigor. The book pointed out that single-layer perceptrons could represent
only linearly separable concepts and noted the lack of effective learning algorithms for mul-
tilayer networks. These limitations were already well known (Hawkins, 1961) and had been
acknowledged by Rosenblatt himself (Rosenblatt, 1962).
The papers collected by Hinton and Anderson (1981), based on a conference in San
Diego in 1979, can be regarded as marking a renaissance of connectionism. The two-volume
“PDP” (Parallel Distributed Processing) anthology (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) helped
to spread the gospel, so to speak, particularly in the psychology and cognitive science com-
munities. The most important development of this period was the back-propagation algorithm
for training multilayer networks.
The back-propagation algorithm was discovered independently several times in different
contexts (Kelley, 1960; Bryson, 1962; Dreyfus, 1962; Bryson and Ho, 1969; Werbos, 1974;
Parker, 1985) and Stuart Dreyfus (1990) calls it the “Kelley–Bryson gradient procedure.”
Although Werbos had applied it to neural networks, this idea did not become widely known
until a paper by David Rumelhart, Geoff Hinton, and Ron Williams (1986) appeared in Nature
giving a nonmathematical presentation of the algorithm. Mathematical respectability was
enhanced by papers showing that multilayer feedforward networks are (subject to technical
conditions) universal function approximators (Cybenko, 1988, 1989). The late 1980s and
early 1990s saw a huge growth in neural network research: the number of papers mushroomed
by a factor of 200 between 1980–84 and 1990–94.
