810 Chapter 22 Deep Learning
way does classical linear regression. The input features to this linear regression are the out-
puts from the preceding layer, which typically result from multiple nonlinear transformations
of the original inputs to the network.
Many other output layers are possible. For example, a mixture density layer represents Mixture density
the outputs using a mixture of Gaussian distributions. (See Section 21.3.1 for more details on
Gaussian mixtures.) Such layers predict the relative frequency of each mixture component,
the mean of each component, and the variance of each component. As long as these output
values are interpreted appropriately by the loss function as deﬁning the probability for the
true output value y, the network will, after training, ﬁt a Gaussian mixture model in the space
of features deﬁned by the preceding layers.
22.2.3 Hidden layers
During the training process, a neural network is shown many input values xand many corre-
sponding output values y. While processing an input vector x, the neural network performs
several intermediate computations before producing the output y. We can think of the values
computed at each layer of the network as a different representation for the input x. Each
layer transforms the representation produced by the preceding layer to produce a new rep-
resentation. The composition of all these transformations succeeds—if all goes well—in
transforming the input into the desired output. Indeed, one hypothesis for why deep learning
works well is that the complex end-to-end transformation that maps from input to output—
say, from an input image to the output category “giraffe”—is decomposed by the many layers
into the composition of many relatively simple transformations, each of which is fairly easy
to learn by a local updating process.
In the process of forming all these internal transformations, deep networks often discover
meaningful intermediate representations of the data. For example, a network learning to
recognize complex objects in images may form internal layers that detect useful subunits:
edges, corners, ellipses, eyes, faces—cats. Or it may not—deep networks may form internal
layers whose meaning is opaque to humans, even though the output is still correct.
The hidden layers of neural networks are typically less diverse than the output layers.
For the ﬁrst 25 years of research with multilayer networks (roughly 1985–2010), internal
nodes used sigmoid and tanh activation functions almost exclusively. From around 2010
onwards, the ReLU and softplus become more popular, partly because they are believed to
avoid the problem of vanishing gradients mentioned in Section 22.1.2. Experimentation with
increasingly deep networks suggested that, in many cases, better learning was obtained with
deep and relatively narrow networks rather than shallow, wide networks, given a ﬁxed total
number of weights. A typical example of this is shown in Figure 22.7 on page 820.
There are, of course, many other structures to consider for computation graphs, besides
just playing with width and depth. At the time of writing, there is little understanding as
to why some structures seem to work better than others for some particular problem. With
experience, practitioners gain some intuition as to how to design networks and how to ﬁx
them when they don’t work, just as chefs gain intuition for how to design recipes and how
to ﬁx them when they taste unpleasant. For this reason, tools that facilitate rapid exploration
and evaluation of different structures are essential for success in real-world problems.
Section 22.3 Convolutional Networks 811
22.3 Convolutional Networks
We mentioned in Section 22.2.1 that an image cannot be thought of as a simple vector of in-
put pixel values, primarily because adjacency of pixels really matters. If we were to construct
a network with fully connected layers and an image as input, we would get the same result
whether we trained with unperturbed images or with images all of whose pixels had been ran-
domly permuted. Furthermore, suppose there are npixels and nunits in the ﬁrst hidden layer,
to which the pixels provide input. If the input and the ﬁrst hidden layer are fully connected,
that means n2weights; for a typical megapixel RGB image, that’s 9 trillion weights. Such a
vast parameter space would require correspondingly vast numbers of training images and a
huge computational budget to run the training algorithm.
These considerations suggest that we should construct the ﬁrst hidden layer so that eachJ
hidden unit receives input from only a small, local region of the image . This kills two birds
with one stone. First, it respects adjacency, at least locally. (And we will see later that if
subsequent layers have the same locality property, then the network will respect adjacency in
a global sense.) Second, it cuts down the number of weights: if each local region has ln
pixels, then there will be lnn2weights in all.
So far, so good. But we are missing another important property of images: roughly
speaking, anything that is detectable in one small, local region of the image—perhaps an eye
or a blade of grass—would look the same if it appeared in another small, local region of the
image. In other words, we expect image data to exhibit approximate spatial invariance , at Spatial invariance
least at small to moderate scales.3We don’t necessarily expect the top halves of photos to
look like bottom halves, so there is a scale beyond which spatial invariance no longer holds.
Local spatial invariance can be achieved by constraining the lweights connecting a local
region to a unit in the hidden layer to be the same for each hidden unit. (That is, for hidden
units iandj, the weights w1;i;:::; wl;iare the same as w1;j;:::; wl;j.) This makes the hidden
units into feature detectors that detect the same feature wherever it appear in the image.
Typically, we want the ﬁrst hidden layer to detect many kinds of features, not just one; so
for each local image region we might have dhidden units with ddistinct sets of weights.
This means that there are dlweights in all—a number that is not only far smaller than n2,
but is actually independent of n, the image size. Thus, by injecting some prior knowledge—
namely, knowledge of adjacency and spatial invariance—we can develop models that have
far fewer parameters and can learn much more quickly.
Aconvolutional neural network (CNN) is one that contains spatially local connections,Convolutional neural
network (CNN)
at least in the early layers, and has patterns of weights that are replicated across the units
in each layer. A pattern of weights that is replicated across multiple local regions is called
akernel and the process of applying the kernel to the pixels of the image (or to spatially Kernel
organized units in a subsequent layer) is called convolution .4Convolution
Kernels and convolutions are easiest to illustrate in one dimension rather than two or
more, so we will assume an input vector xof size n, corresponding to npixels in a one-
3Similar ideas can be applied to process time-series data sources such as audio waveforms. These typically
exhibit temporal invariance —a word sounds the same no matter what time of day it is uttered. Recurrent neural
networks (Section 22.6) automatically exhibit temporal invariance.
4In the terminology of signal processing, we would call this operation a cross-correlation, not a convolution.
But “convolution” is used within the ﬁeld of neural networks.
812 Chapter 22 Deep Learning
5 6 6 2 5 6 55 9 4
+1–1+1 +1–1+1 +1–1+1
Figure 22.4 An example of a one-dimensional convolution operation with a kernel of size
l=3 and a stride s=2. The peak response is centered on the darker (lower intensity) input
pixel. The results would usually be fed through a nonlinear activation function (not shown)
before going to the next hidden layer.
dimensional image, and a vector kernel kof size l. (For simplicity we will assume that lis an
odd number.) All the ideas carry over straightforwardly to higher-dimensional cases.
We write the convolution operation using the symbol, for example: z=xk. The
operation is deﬁned as follows:
zi=l
å
j=1kjxj+i (l+1)=2: (22.8)
In other words, for each output position i, we take the dot product between the kernel kand a
snippet of xcentered on xiwith width l.
The process is illustrated in Figure 22.4 for a kernel vector [+1; 1;+1], which detects
a darker point in the 1D image. (The 2D version might detect a darker line.) Notice that in
this example the pixels on which the kernels are centered are separated by a distance of 2
pixels; we say the kernel is applied with a stride s=2. Notice that the output layer has fewer Stride
pixels: because of the stride, the number of pixels is reduced from nto roughly n=s. (In two
dimensions, the number of pixels would be roughly n=sxsy, where sxandsyare the strides in
thexandydirections in the image.) We say “roughly” because of what happens at the edge
of the image: in Figure 22.4 the convolution stops at the edges of the image, but one can also
pad the input with extra pixels (either zeroes or copies of the outer pixels) so that the kernel
can be applied exactly bn=sctimes. For small kernels, we typically use s=1, so the output
has the same dimensions as the image (see Figure 22.5).
The operation of applying a kernel across an image can be implemented in the obvious
way by a program with suitable nested loops; but it can also be formulated as a single matrix
operation, just like the application of the weight matrix in Equation (22.1). For example, the
convolution illustrated in Figure 22.4 can be viewed as the following matrix multiplication:
 +1 1+1 0 0 0 0
0 0 +1 1+1 0 0
0 0 0 0 +1 1+1!0
BBBBBBBB@5
6
6
2
5
6
51
CCCCCCCCA= 5
9
4!
: (22.9)
In this weight matrix, the kernel appears in each row, shifted according to the stride relative
to the previous row, One wouldn’t necessarily construct the weight matrix explicitly—it is
