Section 22.7 Unsupervised Learning and Transfer Learning 831
Generative adversarial networks
Agenerative adversarial network (GAN) is actually a pair of networks that combine toGenerative
adversarial network
(GAN)form a generative system. One of the networks, the generator , maps values from ztoxin Generator
order to produce samples from the distribution Pw(x). A typical scheme samples zfrom a unit
Gaussian of moderate dimension and then passes it through a deep network hwto obtain x.
The other network, the discriminator , is a classiﬁer trained to classify inputs xas real (drawn Discriminator
from the training set) or fake (created by the generator). GANs are a kind of implicit model Implicit model
in the sense that samples can be generated but their probabilities are not readily available; in a
Bayes net, on the other hand, the probability of a sample is just the product of the conditional
probabilities along the sample generation path.
The generator is closely related to the decoder from the variational autoencoder frame-
work. The challenge in implicit modeling is to design a loss function that makes it possible
to train the model using samples from the distribution, rather than maximizing the likelihood
assigned to training examples from the data set.
Both the generator and the discriminator are trained simultaneously, with the generator
learning to fool the discriminator and the discriminator learning to accurately separate real
from fake data. The competition between generator and discriminator can be described in
the language of game theory (see Chapter 17). The idea is that in the equilibrium state of the
game, the generator should reproduce the training distribution perfectly, such that the discrim-
inator cannot perform better than random guessing. GANs have worked particularly well for
image generation tasks. For example, GANs can create photorealistic, high-resolution images
of people who have never existed (Karras et al. , 2017).
Unsupervised translation
Translation tasks, broadly construed, consist of transforming an input xthat has rich structure
into an output ythat also has rich structure. In this context, “rich structure” means that the
data are multidimensional and have interesting statistical dependencies among the various
dimensions. Images and natural language sentences have a rich structure, but a single number,
such as a class ID, does not. Transforming a sentence from English to French or converting
a photo of a night scene into an equivalent photo taken during the daytime are both examples
of translation tasks.
Supervised translation consists of gathering many (x;y)pairs and training the model to
map each xto the corresponding y. For example, machine translation systems are often
trained on pairs of sentences that have been translated by professional human translators. For
other kinds of translation, supervised training data may not be available. For example, con-
sider a photo of a night scene containing many moving cars and pedestrians. It is presumably
not feasible to ﬁnd all of the cars and pedestrians and return them to their original positions in
the night-time photo in order to retake the same photo in the daytime. To overcome this dif-
ﬁculty, it is possible to use unsupervised translation techniques that are capable of trainingUnsupervised
translation
on many examples of xand many separate examples of ybut no corresponding (x;y)pairs.
These approaches are generally based on GANs; for example, one can train a GAN gen-
erator to produce a realistic example of ywhen conditioned on x, and another GAN generator
to perform the reverse mapping. The GAN training framework makes it possible to train a
generator to generate any one of many possible samples that the discriminator accepts as a
832 Chapter 22 Deep Learning
realistic example of ygiven x, without any need for a speciﬁc paired yas is traditionally
needed in supervised learning. More detail on unsupervised translation for images is given in
Section 27.7.5.
22.7.2 Transfer learning and multitask learning
Intransfer learning , experience with one learning task helps an agent learn better on another Transfer learning
task. For example, a person who has already learned to play tennis will typically ﬁnd it easier
to learn related sports such as racquetball and squash; a pilot who has learned to ﬂy one type
of commercial passenger airplane will very quickly learn to ﬂy another type; a student who
has already learned algebra ﬁnds it easier to learn calculus.
We do not yet know the mechanisms of human transfer learning. For neural networks,
learning consists of adjusting weights, so the most plausible approach for transfer learning is
to copy over the weights learned for task A to a network that will be trained for task B. The
weights are then updated by gradient descent in the usual way using data for task B. It may
be a good idea to use a smaller learning rate in task B, depending on how similar the tasks are
and how much data was used in task A.
Notice that this approach requires human expertise in selecting the tasks: for example,
weights learned during algebra training may not be very useful in a network intended for
racquetball. Also, the notion of copying weights requires a simple mapping between the
input spaces for the two tasks and essentially identical network architectures.
One reason for the popularity of transfer learning is the availability of high-quality pre-
trained models. For example, you could download a pretrained visual object recognition
model such as the ResNet-50 model trained on the COCO data set, thereby saving yourself
weeks of work. From there you can modify the model parameters by supplying additional
images and object labels for your speciﬁc task.
Suppose you want to classify types of unicycles. You have only a few hundred pictures
of different unicycles, but the COCO data set has over 3,000 images in each of the categories
of bicycles, motorcycles, and skateboards. This means that a model pretrained on COCO
already has experience with wheels and roads and other relevant features that will be helpful
in interpreting the unicycle images.
Often you will want to freeze the ﬁrst few layers of the pretrained model—these layers
serve as feature detectors that will be useful for your new model. Your new data set will be
allowed to modify the parameters of the higher levels only; these are the layers that identify
problem-speciﬁc features and do classiﬁcation. However, sometimes the difference between
sensors means that even the lowest-level layers need to be retrained.
As another example, for those building a natural language system, it is now common
to start with a pretrained model such as the R OBERT Amodel (see Section 25.6), which
already “knows” a great deal about the vocabulary and syntax of everyday language. The
next step is to ﬁne-tune the model in two ways. First, by giving it examples of the specialized
vocabulary used in the desired domain; perhaps a medical domain (where it will learn about
“myocardial infarction”) or perhaps a ﬁnancial domain (where it will learn about “ﬁduciary
responsibility”). Second, by training the model on the task it is to perform. If it is to do
question answering, train it on question/answer pairs.
One very important kind of transfer learning involves transfer between simulations and
the real world. For example, the controller for a self-driving car can be trained on billions
Section 22.8 Applications 833
of miles of simulated driving, which would be impossible in the real world. Then, when the
controller is transitioned to the real vehicle, it adapts quickly to the new environment.
Multitask learning is a form of transfer learning in which we simultaneously train a Multitask learning
model on multiple objectives. For example, rather than training a natural language system on
part-of-speech tagging and then transferring the learned weights to a new task such as docu-
ment classiﬁcation, we train one system simultaneously on part-of-speech tagging, document
classiﬁcation, language detection, word prediction, sentence difﬁculty modeling, plagiarism
detection, sentence entailment, and question answering. The idea is that to solve any one of
these tasks, a model might be able to take advantage of superﬁcial features of the data. But to
solve all eight at once with a common representation layer, the model is more likely to create
a common representation that reﬂects real natural language usage and content.
22.8 Applications
Deep learning has been applied successfully to many important problem areas in AI. For in-
depth explanations, we refer the reader to the relevant chapters: Chapter 23 for the use of
deep learning in reinforcement learning systems, Chapter 25 for natural language processing,
Chapter 27 (particularly Section 27.4) for computer vision, and Chapter 26 for robotics.
22.8.1 Vision
We begin with computer vision, which is the application area that has arguably had the biggest
impact on deep learning, and vice versa. Although deep convolutional networks had been in
use since the 1990s for tasks such as handwriting recognition, and neural networks had begun
to surpass generative probability models for speech recognition by around 2010, it was the
success of the AlexNet deep learning system in the 2012 ImageNet competition that propelled
deep learning into the limelight.
The ImageNet competition was a supervised learning task with 1,200,000 images in 1,000
different categories, and systems were evaluated on the “top-5” score—how often the correct
category appears in the top ﬁve predictions. AlexNet achieved an error rate of 15.3%, whereas
the next best system had an error rate of more than 25%. AlexNet had ﬁve convolutional
layers interspersed with max-pooling layers, followed by three fully connected layers. It used
ReLU activation functions and took advantage of GPUs to speed up the process of training
60 million weights.
Since 2012, with improvements in network design, training methods, and computing
resources, the top-5 error rate has been reduced to less than 2%—well below the error rate of
a trained human (around 5%). CNNs have been applied to a wide range of vision tasks, from
self-driving cars to grading cucumbers.8Driving, which is covered in Section 27.7.6 and in
several sections of Chapter 26, is among the most demanding of vision tasks: not only must
the algorithm detect, localize, track, and recognize pigeons, paper bags, and pedestrians, but
it has to do it in real time with near-perfect accuracy.
8The widely known tale of the Japanese cucumber farmer who built his own cucumber-sorting robot using
TensorFlow is, it turns out, mostly mythical. The algorithm was developed by the farmer’s son, who worked
previously as a software engineer at Toyota, and its low accuracy—about 70%—meant that the cucumbers still
had to be sorted by hand (Zeeberg, 2017).
