870 Chapter 23 Reinforcement Learning
•Apprenticeship learning through observation of expert behavior can be an effective
solution when a correct reward function is hard to specify. Imitation learning formu-
lates the problem as supervised learning of a policy from the expert’s state–action pairs.
Inverse reinforcement learning infers reward information from the expert’s behavior.
Reinforcement learning continues to be one of the most active areas of machine learning re-
search. It frees us from manual construction of behaviors and from labeling the vast data sets
required for supervised learning, or having to hand-code control strategies. Applications in
robotics promise to be particularly valuable; these will require methods for handling continu-
ous, high-dimensional, partially observable environments in which successful behaviors may
consist of thousands or even millions of primitive actions.
We have presented a variety of approaches to reinforcement learning because there is
(at least so far) no single best approach. The question of model-based versus model-free
methods is, at its heart, a question about the best way to represent the agent function. This
is an issue at the foundations of artiﬁcial intelligence. As we stated in Chapter 1, one of
the key historical characteristics of much AI research is its (often unstated) adherence to the
knowledge-based approach. This amounts to an assumption that the best way to represent
the agent function is to build a representation of some aspects of the environment in which
the agent is situated. Some argue that with access to sufﬁcient data, model-free methods
can succeed in any domain. Perhaps this is true in theory, but of course, the universe may
not contain enough data to make it true in practice. (For example, it is not easy to imagine
how a model-free approach would enable one to design and build, say, the LIGO gravity-
wave detector.) Our intuition, for what it’s worth, is that as the environment becomes more
complex, the advantages of a model-based approach become more apparent.
Bibliographical and Historical Notes
It seems likely that the key idea of reinforcement learning—that animals do more of what
they are rewarded for and less of what they are punished for—played a signiﬁcant role in
the domestication of dogs at least 15,000 years ago. The early foundations of our scientiﬁc
understanding of reinforcement learning include the work of the Russian physiologist Ivan
Pavlov, who won the Nobel Prize in 1904, and that of the American psychologist Edward
Thorndike—particularly his book Animal Intelligence (1911). Hilgard and Bower (1975)
provide a good survey.
Alan Turing (1948, 1950) proposed reinforcement learning as an approach for teaching
computers; he considered it a partial solution, writing, “The use of punishments and rewards
can at best be a part of the teaching process.” Arthur Samuel’s checkers program (1959,
1967) was the ﬁrst successful use of machine learning of any kind. Samuel suggested most
of the modern ideas in reinforcement learning, including temporal-difference learning and
function approximation. He experimented with multilayer representations of value functions,
similar to today’s deep RL. In the end, he found that a simple linear evaluation function over
handcrafted features worked best. This may have been a consequence of working with a
computer roughly 100 billion times less powerful than a modern tensor processing unit.
Around the same time, researchers in adaptive control theory (Widrow and Hoff, 1960),
building on work by Hebb (1949), were training simple networks using the delta rule. Thus,

Bibliographical and Historical Notes 871
reinforcement learning combines inﬂuences from animal psychology, neuroscience, opera-
tions research, and optimal control theory.
The connection between reinforcement learning and Markov decision processes was ﬁrst
made by Werbos (1977). (Work by Ian Witten (1977) described a TD-like process in the
language of control theory.) The development of reinforcement learning in AI stems primarily
from work at the University of Massachusetts in the early 1980s (Barto et al. , 1981). An
inﬂuential paper by Rich Sutton (1988) provided a mathematical understanding of temporal-
difference methods. The combination of temporal-difference learning with the model-based
generation of simulated experiences was proposed in Sutton’s D YNA architecture (Sutton,
1990). Q-learning was developed in Chris Watkins’s Ph.D. thesis (1989), while SARSA
appeared in a technical report by Rummery and Niranjan (1994). Prioritized sweeping was
introduced independently by Moore and Atkeson (1993) and Peng and Williams (1993).
Function approximation in reinforcement learning goes back to Arthur Samuel’s checkers
program (1959). The use of neural networks to represent value functions was common in the
1980s and came to the fore in Gerry Tesauro’s TD-Gammon program (Tesauro, 1992, 1995).
Deep neural networks are currently the most popular choice for function approximators in
reinforcement learning. Arulkumaran et al. (2017) and Francois-Lavet et al. (2018) give
overviews of deep RL. The DQN system (Mnih et al. , 2015) uses a deep network to learn
a Q-function, while A LPHA ZERO (Silver et al. , 2018) learns both a value function for use
with a known model and a Q-function for use in metalevel decisions that guide search. Irpan
(2018) warns that deep RL systems can perform poorly if the actual environment is even
slightly different from the training environment.
Weighted linear combinations of features and neural networks are factored represen-
tations for function approximation. It is also possible to apply reinforcement learning to
structured representations; this is called relational reinforcement learning (Tadepalli et al. ,
2004). The use of relational descriptions allows for generalization across complex behaviors
involving different objects.
Analysis of the convergence properties of reinforcement learning algorithms using func-
tion approximation is an extremely technical subject. Results for TD learning have been pro-
gressively strengthened for the case of linear function approximators (Sutton, 1988; Dayan,
1992; Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1997), but several examples of divergence have been presented
for nonlinear functions (see Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1997, for a discussion). Papavassiliou
and Russell (1999) describe a type of reinforcement learning that converges with any form of
function approximator, provided that the problem of ﬁtting the hypothesis to the data is solv-
able. Liu et al. (2018) describe the family of gradient TD algorithms and provide extensive
theoretical analysis of convergence and sample complexity.
A variety of exploration methods for sequential decision problems are discussed by Barto
et al. (1995). Kearns and Singh (1998) and Brafman and Tennenholtz (2000) describe algo-
rithms that explore unknown environments and are guaranteed to converge on near-optimal
policies with a sample complexity that is polynomial in the number of states. Bayesian re-
inforcement learning (Dearden et al. , 1998, 1999) provides another angle on both model
uncertainty and exploration.
The basic idea underlying imitation learning is to apply supervised learning to a training
set of expert actions. This is an old idea in adaptive control, but ﬁrst came to prominence
in AI with the work of Sammut et al. (1992) on “Learning to Fly” in a ﬂight simulator.