Section 23.3 Active Reinforcement Learning 849
 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
 0  100  200  300  400  500RMS error, policy loss
Number of trialsRMS error
Policy loss
(a) (b)
Figure 23.6 Performance of a greedy ADP agent that executes the action recommended by
the optimal policy for the learned model. (a) The root mean square (RMS) error averaged
across all nine nonterminal squares and the policy loss in (1,1). We see that the policy con-
verges quickly, after just eight trials, to a suboptimal policy with a loss of 0.235. (b) The
suboptimal policy to which the greedy agent converges in this particular sequence of trials.
Notice the Down action in (1,2).
The greedy agent has overlooked the fact that actions do more than provide rewards ;
they also provide information in the form of percepts in the resulting states. As we saw with
bandit problems in Section 16.3, an agent must make a tradeoff between exploitation of the
current best action to maximize its short-term reward and exploration of previously unknown
states to gain information that can lead to a change in policy (and to greater rewards in the
future). In the real world, one constantly has to decide between continuing in a comfortable
existence, versus striking out into the unknown in the hopes of a better life.
Although bandit problems are difﬁcult to solve exactly to obtain an optimal exploration
scheme, it is nonetheless possible to come up with a scheme that will eventually discover an
optimal policy, even if it might take longer to do so than is optimal. Any such scheme should
not be greedy in terms of the immediate next move, but should be what is called “greedy in
the limit of inﬁnite exploration,” or GLIE . A GLIE scheme must try each action in each state GLIE
an unbounded number of times to avoid having a ﬁnite probability that an optimal action is
missed. An ADP agent using such a scheme will eventually learn the true transition model,
and can then operate under exploitation.
There are several GLIE schemes; one of the simplest is to have the agent choose a random
action at time step twith probability 1 =tand to follow the greedy policy otherwise. While this
does eventually converge to an optimal policy, it can be slow. A better approach would give
some weight to actions that the agent has not tried very often, while tending to avoid actions
that are believed to be of low utility (as we did with Monte Carlo tree search in Section 6.4).
This can be implemented by altering the constraint equation (23.4) so that it assigns a higher
utility estimate to relatively unexplored state–action pairs.
This amounts to an optimistic prior over the possible environments and causes the agent
to behave initially as if there were wonderful rewards scattered all over the place. Let us use
U+(s)to denote the optimistic estimate of the utility (i.e., the expected reward-to-go) of the

850 Chapter 23 Reinforcement Learning
state s, and let N(s;a)be the number of times action ahas been tried in state s. Suppose
we are using value iteration in an ADP learning agent; then we need to rewrite the update
equation (Equation (16.10) on page 563) to incorporate the optimistic estimate:
U+(s) max
af
å
s0P(s0js;a)[R(s;a;s0)+U+(s0)];N(s;a)
: (23.5)
Here, fis the exploration function . The function f(u;n)determines how greed (preference Exploration function
for high values of the utility u) is traded off against curiosity (preference for actions that have
not been tried often and have a low count n). The function should be increasing in uand
decreasing in n. Obviously, there are many possible functions that ﬁt these conditions. One
particularly simple deﬁnition is
f(u;n) =R+ifn<Ne
uotherwise,
where R+is an optimistic estimate of the best possible reward obtainable in any state and
Neis a ﬁxed parameter. This will have the effect of making the agent try each state–action
pair at least Netimes. The fact that U+rather than Uappears on the right-hand side of
Equation (23.5) is very important. As exploration proceeds, the states and actions near the
start state might well be tried a large number of times. If we used U, the more pessimistic
utility estimate, then the agent would soon become disinclined to explore further aﬁeld. The
use of U+means that the beneﬁts of exploration are propagated back from the edges of
unexplored regions, so that actions that lead toward unexplored regions are weighted more
highly, rather than just actions that are themselves unfamiliar.
The effect of this exploration policy can be seen clearly in Figure 23.7(b), which shows
a rapid convergence toward zero policy loss, unlike with the greedy approach. A very nearly
optimal policy is found after just 18 trials. Notice that the RMS error in the utility estimates
does not converge as quickly. This is because the agent stops exploring the unrewarding
parts of the state space fairly soon, visiting them only “by accident” thereafter. However, it
makes perfect sense for the agent not to care about the exact utilities of states that it knows
are undesirable and can be avoided. There is not much point in learning about the best radio
station to listen to while falling off a cliff.
23.3.2 Safe exploration
So far we have assumed that an agent is free to explore as it wishes—that any negative rewards
serve only to improve its model of the world. That is, if we play a game of chess and lose,
we suffer no damage (except perhaps to our pride), and whatever we learned will make us
a better player in the next game. Similarly, in a simulation environment for a self-driving
car, we could explore the limits of the car’s performance, and any accidents give us more
information. If the car crashes, we just hit the reset button.
Unfortunately, the real world is less forgiving. If you are a baby sunﬁsh, your probability
of surviving to adulthood is about 0.00000001. Many actions are irreversible , in the sense
deﬁned for online search agents in Section 4.5: no subsequent sequence of actions can restore
the state to what it was before the irreversible action was taken. In the worst case, the agent
enters an absorbing state where no actions have any effect and no rewards are received. Absorbing state
In many practical settings, we cannot afford to have our agents taking irreversible actions
or entering absorbing states. For example, an agent learning to drive in a real car should avoid

Section 23.3 Active Reinforcement Learning 851
 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2
 0  20  40  60  80  100Utility estimates
Number of trials(1,1)
(1,3)
(2,1)
(3,2)
(3,3)
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 0  20  40  60  80  100RMS error, policy loss
Number of trialsRMS error
Policy loss
(a) (b)
Figure 23.7 Performance of the exploratory ADP agent using R+=2 and Ne=5. (a) Utility
estimates for selected states over time. (b) The RMS error in utility values and the associated
policy loss.
taking actions that might lead to any of the following:
•states with large negative rewards, such as serious car crashes;
•states from which there is no escape, such as driving the car into a deep ditch;
•states that permanently limit future rewards, such as damaging the car’s engine so that
its maximum speed is reduced.
We can end up in a bad state either because our model is unknown , and we actively choose
to explore in a direction that turns out to be bad, or because our model is incorrect and
we don’t know that a given action can have a disastrous result. Note that the algorithm in
Figure 23.2 is using maximum-likelihood estimation (see Chapter 21) to learn the transition
model; moreover, by choosing a policy based solely on the estimated model, it is acting as if
the model were correct. This is not necessarily a good idea! For example, a taxi agent that
didn’t know how trafﬁc lights work might ignore a red light once or twice with no ill effects
and then formulate a policy to ignore all red lights from then on.
A better idea would be to choose a policy that works reasonably well for the whole range
of models that have a reasonable chance of being the true model, even if the policy happens to
be suboptimal for the maximum-likelihood model. There are three mathematical approaches
that have this ﬂavor.
The ﬁrst approach, Bayesian reinforcement learning , assumes a prior probability P(h)Bayesian
reinforcement
learningover hypotheses habout what the true model is; the posterior probability P(hje)is obtained
in the usual way by Bayes’ rule given the observations to date. Then, if the agent has decided
to stop learning, the optimal policy is the one that gives the highest expected utility. Let U
h
be the expected utility, averaged over all possible start states, obtained by executing policy 
in model h. Then we have
=argmax
å
hP(hje)U
h:
In some special cases, this policy can even be computed! If the agent will continue learning
in the future, however, then ﬁnding an optimal policy becomes considerably more difﬁcult,