872 Chapter 23 Reinforcement Learning
They called their method behavioral cloning . A few years later, the same research group
reported that the method was much more fragile than had been reported initially (Camacho
and Michie, 1995): even very small perturbations caused the learned policy to deviate from
the desired trajectory, leading to compounding errors as the agent strayed further and further
from the training set. (See also the discussion on page 973.) Work on apprenticeship learning
aims to make the approach more robust, in part by including information about the desired
outcomes rather than just the expert policy. Ng et al. (2003) and Coates et al. (2009) show
how apprenticeship learning works for learning to ﬂy an actual helicopter, as illustrated in
Figure 23.9(b) on page 868.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) was introduced by Russell (1998), and the ﬁrst al-
gorithms were developed by Ng and Russell (2000). (A similar problem has been studied in
economics for much longer, under the heading of structural estimation of MDPs (Sargent,
1978).) The algorithm given in the chapter is due to Abbeel and Ng (2004). Baker et al.
(2009) describe how the understanding of another agent’s actions can be seen as inverse plan-
ning. Ho et al. (2017) show that agents can learn better from behaviors that are instructive
rather than optimal . Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. (2017a) extend IRL into a game-theoretic formu-
lation that encompasses both observer and demonstrator, showing how teaching and learning
behaviors emerge as solutions of the game.
Garc ´ıa and Fern ´andez (2015) give a comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learn-
ing. Munos et al. (2017) describe an algorithm for safe off-policy (e.g., Q-learning) explo-
ration. Hans et al. (2008) break the problem of safe exploration into two parts: deﬁning a
safety function to indicate which states to avoid, and deﬁning a backup policy to lead the
agent back to safety when it might otherwise enter an unsafe state. You et al. (2017) show
how to train a deep reinforcement learning model to drive a car in simulation, and then use
transfer learning to drive safely in the real world.
Thomas et al. (2017) offer an approach to learning that is guaranteed, with high proba-
bility, to do no worse than the current policy. Akametalu et al. (2014) describe a reachability-
based approach, in which the learning process operates under the guidance of a control policy
that ensures the agent never reaches an unsafe state. Saunders et al. (2018) demonstrate that
a system can use human intervention to stop it from wandering out of the safe region, and can
learn over time to need less intervention.
Policy search methods were brought to the fore by Williams (1992), who developed the
REINFORCE family of algorithms, which stands for “REward Increment = Nonnegative Fac-
torOffset Reinforcement Characteristic Eligibility.” Later work by Marbach and Tsitsik-
lis (1998), Sutton et al. (2000), and Baxter and Bartlett (2000) strengthened and generalized
the convergence results for policy search. Schulman et al. (2015b) describe trust region pol-
icy optimization , a theoretically well-founded and also practical policy search algorithm that
has spawned many variants. The method of correlated sampling to reduce variance in Monte
Carlo comparisons is due to Kahn and Marshall (1953); it is also one of a number of variance
reduction methods explored by Hammersley and Handscomb (1964).
Early approaches to hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) attempted to construct
hierarchies using state abstraction —that is, grouping states together into abstract states and
then doing RL in the abstract state space (Dayan and Hinton, 1993). Unfortunately, the tran-
sition model for abstract states is typically non-Markovian, leading to divergent behavior of
standard RL algorithms. The temporal abstraction approach in this chapter was developed in

Bibliographical and Historical Notes 873
the late 1990s (Parr and Russell, 1998; Andre and Russell, 2002; Sutton et al. , 2000) and ex-
tended to handle concurrent behaviors by Marthi et al. (2005). Dietterich (2000) introduced
the notion of an additive decomposition of Q-functions induced by the subroutine hierarchy.
Temporal abstraction is based on a much earlier result due to Forestier and Varaiya (1978),
who showed that a large MDP can be decomposed into a two-layer system in which a su-
pervisory layer chooses among low-level controllers, each of which returns control to the
supervisor on completion. The problem of learning the abstraction hierarchy itself has been
studied at least since the work of Peter Andreae (1985); for a recent exploration into learn-
ing robot motion primitives, see Frans et al. (2018). The keepaway game was introduced by
Stone et al. (2005); the HRL solution given here is due to Bai and Russell (2017).
Neuroscience has often inspired reinforcement learning and conﬁrmed the value of the
approach. Research using single-cell recording suggests that the dopamine system in primate
brains implements something resembling value-function learning (Schultz et al. , 1997). The
neuroscience text by Dayan and Abbott (2001) describes possible neural implementations of
temporal-difference learning; related research describes other neuroscientiﬁc and behavioral
experiments (Dayan and Niv, 2008; Niv, 2009; Lee et al. , 2012).
Work in reinforcement learning has been accelerated by the availability of open-source
simulation environments for developing and testing learning agents. The University of Al-
berta’s Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al. , 2013) provided such a frame-
work for 55 classic Atari video games. The pixels on the screen are provided to the agent as
percepts, along with a hardwired score of the game so far. ALE was used by the DeepMind
team to implement DQN learning and verify the generality of their system on a wide variety
of games (Mnih et al. , 2015).
DeepMind in turn open-sourced several agent platforms, including the DeepMind Lab
(Beattie et al. , 2016), the AI Safety Gridworlds (Leike et al. , 2017), the Unity game platform
(Juliani et al. , 2018), and the DM Control Suite (Tassa et al. , 2018). Blizzard released the
StarCraft II Learning Environment (SC2LE), to which DeepMind added the PySC2 compo-
nent for machine learning in Python (Vinyals et al. , 2017a).
Facebook’s AI Habitat simulation (Savva et al. , 2019) provides a photo-realistic virtual
environment for indoor robotic tasks, and their H ORIZON platform (Gauci et al. , 2018) en-
ables reinforcement learning in large-scale production systems. The S YNTHIA system (Ros
et al. , 2016) is a simulation environment designed for improving the computer vision ca-
pabilities of self-driving cars. The OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. , 2016) provides several
environments for reinforcement learning agents, and is compatible with other simulations
such as the Google Football simulator.
Littman (2015) surveys reinforcement learning for a general scientiﬁc audience. The
canonical text by Sutton and Barto (2018), two of the ﬁeld’s pioneers, shows how reinforce-
ment learning weaves together the ideas of learning, planning, and acting. Kochenderfer
(2015) takes a slightly less mathematical approach, with plenty of real-world examples. A
short book by Szepesvari (2010) gives an overview of reinforcement learning algorithms.
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996) provide a rigorous grounding in the theory of dynamic pro-
gramming and stochastic convergence. Reinforcement learning papers are published fre-
quently in the journals Machine Learning andJournal of Machine Learning Research , and
in the the proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) and the
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) conferences.