Section 23.7 Applications of Reinforcement Learning 867
icy, N EUROGAMMON converted each move (s;a;s0)into a set of training examples, each of
which labeled s0as a better position than some other position s00reachable from sby a differ-
ent move. The network had two separate halves, one for s0and one for s00, and was constrained
to choose which was better by comparing the outputs of the two halves. In this way, each half
was forced to learn an evaluation function ˆU. N EUROGAMMON won the 1989 Computer
Olympiad—the ﬁrst learning program ever to win a computer game tournament—but never
progressed past Tesauro’s own intermediate level of play.
Tesauro’s next system, TD-G AMMON (1992), adopted Sutton’s recently published TD
learning method—essentially returning to the approach explored by Samuel, but with much
greater technical understanding of how to do it right. The evaluation function ˆUwas repre-
sented by a fully connected neural network with a single hidden layer containing 80 nodes.
(It also used some manually designed input features borrowed from N EUROGAMMON .) Af-
ter 300,000 training games, it reached a standard of play comparable to the top three human
players in the world. Kit Woolsey, a top-ten player, said, “There is no question in my mind
that its positional judgment is far better than mine.”
The next challenge was to learn from raw perceptual inputs—something closer to the real
world—rather than discrete game board representations. Beginning in 2012, a team at Deep-
Mind developed the deep Q-network (DQN) system, the ﬁrst modern deep RL system. DQNDeep Q-network
(DQN)
uses a deep neural network to represent the Q-function; otherwise it is a typical reinforcement
learning system. DQN was trained separately on each of 49 different Atari video games. It
learned to drive simulated race cars, shoot alien spaceships, and bounce balls with paddles.
In each case, the agent learned a Q-function from raw image data with the reward signal be-
ing the game score. Overall, the system performed at roughly human expert level, although
a few games gave it trouble. One game in particular, Montezuma’s Revenge , proved far too
difﬁcult, because it required extended planning strategies, and the rewards were too sparse.
Subsequent work produced deep RL systems that generated more extensive exploratory be-
haviors and were able to conquer Montezuma’s Revenge and other difﬁcult games.
DeepMind’s A LPHA GOsystem also used deep reinforcement learning to beat the best
human players at the game of Go (see Chapter 6). Whereas a Q-function with no look-ahead
sufﬁces for Atari games, which are primarily reactive in nature, Go requires substantial look-
ahead. For this reason, A LPHA GOlearned both a value function and a Q-function that guided
its search by predicting which moves are worth exploring. The Q-function, implemented as
a convolutional neural network, is accurate enough by itself to beat most amateur human
players without any search at all.
23.7.2 Application to robot control
The setup for the famous cart–pole balancing problem, also known as the inverted pendu- Cart{pole
lum, is shown in Figure 23.9(a). The problem is to keep the pole roughly upright ( 90)Inverted pendulum
by applying forces to move the cart right or left, while keeping the position xwithin the limits
of the track. Several thousand papers in reinforcement learning and control theory have been
published on this seemingly simple problem. One difﬁculty is that the state variables x,, ˙x,
and˙are continuous. The actions, however, are deﬁned to be discrete: jerk left or jerk right,
the so-called bang-bang control regime. Bang-bang control
The earliest work on learning for this problem was carried out by Michie and Cham-
bers (1968), using a real cart and pole, not a simulation. Their B OXES algorithm was able

868 Chapter 23 Reinforcement Learning
xθ
(a) (b)
Figure 23.9 (a) Setup for the problem of balancing a long pole on top of a moving cart.
The cart can be jerked left or right by a controller that observes the cart’s position xand
velocity ˙ x, as well as the pole’s angle and rate of change of angle ˙. (b) Six superimposed
time-lapse images of a single autonomous helicopter performing a very difﬁcult “nose-in
circle” maneuver. The helicopter is under the control of a policy developed by the P EGASUS
policy-search algorithm (Ng et al. , 2003). A simulator model was developed by observing
the effects of various control manipulations on the real helicopter; then the algorithm was
run on the simulator model overnight. A variety of controllers were developed for different
maneuvers. In all cases, performance far exceeded that of an expert human pilot using remote
control. (Image courtesy of Andrew Ng.)
to balance the pole for over an hour after 30 trials. The algorithm ﬁrst discretized the four-
dimensional state space into boxes—hence the name. It then ran trials until the pole fell over.
Negative reinforcement was associated with the ﬁnal action in the ﬁnal box and then propa-
gated back through the sequence. Improved generalization and faster learning can be obtained
using an algorithm that adaptively partitions the state space according to the observed varia-
tion in the reward, or by using a continuous-state, nonlinear function approximator such as a
neural network. Nowadays, balancing a triple inverted pendulum (three poles joined together
end to end) is a common exercise—a feat far beyond the capabilities of most humans, but
achievable using reinforcement learning.
Still more impressive is the application of reinforcement learning to radio-controlled
helicopter ﬂight (Figure 23.9(b)). This work has generally used policy search over large
MDPs (Bagnell and Schneider, 2001; Ng et al. , 2003), often combined with imitation learn-
ing and inverse RL given observations of a human expert pilot (Coates et al. , 2009).
Inverse RL has also been applied successfully to interpret human behavior, including
destination prediction and route selection by taxi drivers based on 100,000 miles of GPS
data (Ziebart et al. , 2008) and detailed physical movements by pedestrians in complex envi-
ronments based on hours of video observation (Kitani et al. , 2012). In the area of robotics,
a single expert demonstration was enough for the LittleDog quadruped to learn a 25-feature
reward function and nimbly traverse a previously unseen area of rocky terrain (Kolter et al. ,
2008). For more on how RL and inverse RL are used in robotics, see Sections 26.7 and 26.8.

Summary 869
Summary
This chapter has examined the reinforcement learning problem: how an agent can become
proﬁcient in an unknown environment, given only its percepts and occasional rewards. Re-
inforcement learning is a very broadly applicable paradigm for creating intelligent systems.
The major points of the chapter are as follows.
• The overall agent design dictates the kind of information that must be learned:
–Amodel-based reinforcement learning agent acquires (or is equipped with) a
transition model P(s0js;a)for the environment and learns a utility function U(s).
–Amodel-free reinforcement learning agent may learn an action-utility function
Q(s;a)or a policy(s).
• Utilities can be learned using several different approaches:
– Direct utility estimation uses the total observed reward-to-go for a given state as
direct evidence for learning its utility.
– Adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) learns a model and a reward function
from observations and then uses value or policy iteration to obtain the utilities or
an optimal policy. ADP makes optimal use of the local constraints on utilities of
states imposed through the neighborhood structure of the environment.
– Temporal-difference (TD) methods adjust utility estimates to be more consistent
with those of successor states. They can be viewed as simple approximations of the
ADP approach that can learn without requiring a transition model. Using a learned
model to generate pseudoexperiences can, however, result in faster learning.
• Action-utility functions, or Q-functions, can be learned by an ADP approach or a TD
approach. With TD, Q-learning requires no model in either the learning or action-
selection phase. This simpliﬁes the learning problem but potentially restricts the ability
to learn in complex environments, because the agent cannot simulate the results of
possible courses of action.
• When the learning agent is responsible for selecting actions while it learns, it must
trade off the estimated value of those actions against the potential for learning useful
new information. An exact solution for the exploration problem is infeasible, but some
simple heuristics do a reasonable job. An exploring agent must also take care to avoid
premature death.
• In large state spaces, reinforcement learning algorithms must use an approximate func-
tional representation of U(s)orQ(s;a)in order to generalize over states. Deep re-
inforcement learning —using deep neural networks as function approximators—has
achieved considerable success on hard problems.
•Reward shaping andhierarchical reinforcement learning are helpful for learning
complex behaviors, particularly when rewards are sparse and long action sequences are
required to obtain them.
•Policy-search methods operate directly on a representation of the policy, attempting
to improve it based on observed performance. The variation in the performance in a
stochastic domain is a serious problem; for simulated domains this can be overcome by
ﬁxing the randomness in advance.